This article takes a detailed look at coffee and its health effects, looking at both the positives and negatives.

However, it also contains caffeine, a stimulant that can cause problems in some people and disrupt sleep.

The health effects of coffee are controversial. It contains a range of nutrients and may reduce the risk of certain conditions.

Possible health benefits of coffee include providing essential nutrients and supporting brain health. However, it can cause side effects such as anxiety and sleep problems.

A typical 8-ounce (237-gram) cup of coffee provides a source of:

Coffee is rich in many of the nutrients naturally found in coffee beans.

A 2018 randomized controlled trial demonstrated that both caffeinated and decaf coffee can lead to a short-term boost in brain function, improving mood, reaction time, vigilance and general cognitive function.

By blocking adenosine , caffeine increases activity in your brain and releases other neurotransmitters like norepinephrine and dopamine. This reduces tiredness and makes you feel more alert.

Caffeine is a known stimulant. In your brain, it blocks the function of an inhibitory neurotransmitter (brain hormone) called adenosine.

The caffeine content of a single cup of coffee is somewhere around 95 mg.

More research is necessary to better understand this. Speak with your doctor for more information about ways to lower the risk of Parkinson’s disease.

Coffee drinkers may have a lower risk of Parkinson’s disease.

Parkinson’s is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and is caused by the death of dopamine-generating neurons in the brain.

A 2018 systematic review shows similar results, showing that coffee provides significant antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.

Studies show that coffee drinkers may have a reduced risk of developing type 2 diabetes. According to a 2021 review , drinking coffee often may lower type 2 diabetes risk by protecting the liver and preserving beta cell function.

Type 2 diabetes is characterized by elevated blood sugar levels due to resistance to the effects of insulin.

Coffee drinkers may also have a significantly lower risk of liver cancer. More research is necessary.

A 2021 review concluded that all types of coffee, including decaf, may protect against chronic liver disease.

A 2020 article also found that drinking coffee may help lower the risk of depression. However, the article also notes that more research is necessary.

In a 2018 study , people who drank at least 4 cups of coffee per day had a 63% lower risk of depression compared with those who drank under 1 cup per day.

While coffee can offer some health benefits, it can also cause side effects.

Consuming too much caffeine can lead to :

jitteriness

anxiety

heart palpitations

sleep problems

If you are sensitive to caffeine and tend to become overstimulated, you may want to avoid coffee altogether.

Caffeine can also have diuretic and blood pressure-raising effects. However, a 2023 systematic review showed that coffee drinkers experienced a lower risk of high blood pressure. This suggests that, over time, coffee may lower rather than raise blood pressure.

Some people — especially pregnant people — should definitely avoid or severely limit coffee consumption.

People with anxiety issues, high blood pressure, or insomnia might also want to reduce their intake for a while to see if it helps.

Addiction and withdrawal

Another issue with caffeine is that it can lead to addiction.

When people consume caffeine regularly, they become tolerant to it. It either stops working as it did, or a larger dose is needed to produce the same effects.

When people abstain from caffeine, they can experience withdrawal symptoms. These can include:

headaches

exhaustion

brain fog

irritability

These symptoms can last for a few days . Is drinking coffee healthy?

Drinking coffee can be healthy. For example, studies find that coffee drinkers have a lower risk of death from any cause compared to people who don't drink coffee.

The benefits of coffee depend on things like how much you drink, your age, being biologically male or female, medicine you take, and even your genes.

Some benefits are linked to caffeine. Other benefits are related to the other components in coffee. But in general, studies find that coffee is linked to health in many ways. Drinking coffee may be linked to a lower risk of:

Parkinson's disease, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer's disease among some groups of people.

Metabolic syndrome and chronic kidney disease.

Liver cancer and liver disease, including cirrhosis.

Gallstones and kidney stones.

Drinking coffee with caffeine has been linked with improved mood and a lower risk of depression in some groups. Drinking 3 to 4 cups of coffee a day is linked to a lower risk of stroke in some studies. And coffee may help protect against cancers of the mouth, throat and digestive system. But the evidence isn't conclusive.

Coffee has some risks, mostly due to caffeine.

Taking in too much caffeine can cause anxiety, headache or faster heart rate.

Caffeinated coffee can increase heartburn symptoms, also called reflux symptoms.

Urinary symptoms including frequency and urgency may increase from caffeine.

Coffee that's made without a filter, such as using a French press, has been linked to a small rise in cholesterol levels.

Some studies link drinking five or more cups of coffee a day to lower bone density among some groups of women. But taking in higher amounts of food and drink with calcium can limit this potential issue.

People who are pregnant, trying to become pregnant or breastfeeding should limit their consumption of caffeine to 200 milligrams per day. That is about the amount in 12 fluid ounces (360 milliliters) of coffee.



Daily coffee is OK for many

For most people, it's OK to drink coffee daily and it may have benefits. But if you have side effects from caffeinated coffee, slowly cut down on how much you drink to avoid withdrawal symptoms.

There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form. From Mayo Clinic to your inbox Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. Email Address 1 ErrorEmail field is required ErrorInclude a valid email address Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Subscribe! Thank you for subscribing! You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry



 Caffeine is the first thing that comes to mind when you think about coffee. But coffee also contains antioxidants and other active substances that may reduce internal inflammation and protect against disease, say nutrition experts from Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Good news: The case for coffee is stronger than ever. Study after study indicates you could be getting more from your favorite morning beverage than you thought: Coffee is chock full of substances that may help guard against conditions more common in women, including Alzheimer’s disease and heart disease.

Ah, coffee. Whether you’re cradling a travel mug on your way to work or dashing out after spin class to refuel with a skinny latte, it’s hard to imagine a day without it. The caffeine perks you up, and there’s something incredibly soothing about sipping a steaming cup of joe. But is drinking coffee good for you?

Your brew gives you benefits beyond an energy boost. Here are the top ways coffee can positively impact your health:

For women, drinking at least one cup of coffee a day is associated with lowered stroke risk, which is the fourth leading cause of death in women.

Almost two-thirds of Americans living with Alzheimer’s disease are women. But the caffeine in two cups of coffee may provide significant protection against developing the condition. In fact, researchers found that women age 65 and older who drank two to three cups of coffee a day were less likely to develop dementia in general.

One in 23 women develop colon cancer. But researchers found that coffee drinkers — decaf or regular — were 26 percent less likely to develop colorectal cancer .

Dark roast coffee decreases breakage in DNA strands, which occur naturally but can lead to cancer or tumors if not repaired by your cells.

Both regular and decaf coffee seem to have a protective effect on your liver. Research shows that coffee drinkers are more likely to have liver enzyme levels within a healthy range than people who don’t drink coffee.

Caffeine is not only linked to a lower chance of developing Parkinson’s disease , but it may also help those with the condition better control their movements.

Drinking one to two cups of coffee a day may help ward off heart failure , when a weakened heart has difficulty pumping enough blood to the body.

That’s the theory behind studies that found that people who drink more coffee are less likely to get type 2 diabetes.

Recent studies found that coffee drinkers are less likely to die from some of the leading causes of death in women: coronary heart disease , stroke , diabetes and kidney disease .

Johns Hopkins’ behavioral pharmacist and addiction researcher Dustin Lee studies caffeine tolerance and says one clue may be that consuming caffeine can lead the body to produce more adenosine, a hormone that helps you feel tired.

How much coffee is safe for women to drink each day?

It’s true, you can have too much of a good thing. Excessive intake of caffeinated coffee can make you jittery and cause:

Increased heart rate

Raised blood pressure

Anxiety

Trouble falling asleep

So how much coffee is the optimal amount to drink to get all the benefits, but avoid the negative side effects?

According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, it’s safe for most women to drink three to five cups of coffee a day with a maximum intake of 400 milligrams of caffeine. (Caffeine content can vary depending on the type of coffee, but an average 8-ounce cup has 95 milligrams.)

But if you’re pregnant or breastfeeding, the rules are different. Check with your obstetrician before adding caffeine into your diet. If coffee gives you the jitters, take care not to overdo it: Caffeine tolerance is different for everyone. You can still get some of the potential health benefits by drinking one cup of coffee a day, or even decaf.

Also, remember that what you add to your coffee can make a difference in how healthy the beverage really is. Instead of loading up on cream and sugar, try adding up to two tablespoons of milk, milk substitute or half-and-half, and using naturally sweet spices and flavorings. Try stirring in a ¼ teaspoon of the following for extra flavor:

Vanilla extract

Cardamom

Cinnamon

Cocoa powder

While coffee is a pleasurable part of your lifestyle, there are other factors that make a bigger impact on your health such as eating a balanced diet, exercising and maintaining a healthy weight. But drinking coffee is a delightful addition to those key health factors. Coffee lovers around the world who reach for their favorite morning brew probably aren’t thinking about its health benefits or risks. And yet this beverage has been subject to a long history of debate. In 1991 coffee was included in a list of possible carcinogens by the World Health Organization. By 2016 it was exonerated, as research found that the beverage was not associated with an increased risk of cancer; on the contrary, there was a decreased risk of certain cancers among those who drink coffee regularly once smoking history was properly accounted for. Additional accumulating research suggests that when consumed in moderation, coffee can be considered a healthy beverage. Why then in 2018 did one U.S. state pass legislation that coffee must bear a cancer warning label? Read on to explore the complexities of coffee.

Source Of

Caffeine

Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)

Magnesium

Plant chemicals: polyphenols including chlorogenic acid and quinic acid, and diterpenes including cafestol and kahweol

One 8-ounce cup of brewed coffee contains about 95 mg of caffeine. A moderate amount of coffee is generally defined as 3-5 cups a day, or on average 400 mg of caffeine, according to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.

Coffee and Health

Coffee is an intricate mixture of more than a thousand chemicals. [1] The cup of coffee you order from a coffee shop is likely different from the coffee you brew at home. What defines a cup is the type of coffee bean used, how it is roasted, the amount of grind, and how it is brewed. Human response to coffee or caffeine can also vary substantially across individuals. Low to moderate doses of caffeine (50–300 mg) may cause increased alertness, energy, and ability to concentrate, while higher doses may have negative effects such as anxiety, restlessness, insomnia, and increased heart rate. [2] Still, the cumulative research on coffee points in the direction of a health benefit. [3,4] Does the benefit stem from the caffeine or plant compounds in the coffee bean? Is there a certain amount of coffee needed a day to produce a health benefit?

Cancer Coffee may affect how cancer develops, ranging from the initiation of a cancer cell to its death. For example, coffee may stimulate the production of bile acids and speed digestion through the colon, which can lower the amount of carcinogens to which colon tissue is exposed. Various polyphenols in coffee have been shown to prevent cancer cell growth in animal studies. Coffee has also been associated with decreased estrogen levels, a hormone linked to several types of cancer. [5] Caffeine itself may interfere with the growth and spread of cancer cells. [6] Coffee also appears to lower inflammation, a risk factor for many cancers. The 2018 uproar in California due to warning labels placed on coffee products stemmed from a chemical in the beverage called acrylamide, which is formed when the beans are roasted. Acrylamide is also found in some starchy foods that are processed with high heat like French fries, cookies, crackers, and potato chips. It was classified in the National Toxicology Program’s 2014 Report on Carcinogens, as “reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen” based on studies in lab animals. However, there is not yet evidence of a health effect in humans from eating acrylamide in food. Regardless, in March 2018 a California judge ruled that all California coffee sellers must warn consumers about the “potential cancer risk” from drinking coffee, because coffee-selling companies failed to show that acrylamide did not pose a significant health risk. California’s law Proposition 65, or The Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986, fueled the ruling, which requires a warning label to be placed on any ingredient from a list of 900 confirmed or suspected carcinogens. However, many cancer experts disputed the ruling, stating that the metabolism of acrylamide differs considerably in animals and humans, and the high amount of acrylamide used in animal research is not comparable to the amount present in food. They cited the beneficial health effects of coffee, with improved antioxidant responses and reduced inflammation, both factors important in cancer prevention. Evidence from the American Institute for Cancer Research concludes that drinking coffee may reduce risk for endometrial and liver cancer, and based on a systematic review of a large body of research, it is not a risk for the cancers that were studied. In June 2018, the California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA) proposed a new regulation exempting coffee from displaying cancer warnings under Proposition 65. This proposal was based on a review of more than 1,000 studies published by the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer that found inadequate evidence that drinking coffee causes cancer. In January 2019, OEHHA completed its review and response to comments and submitted the regulation to the Office of Administrative Law (OAL) for final review.

Type 2 Diabetes Although ingestion of caffeine can increase blood sugar in the short-term, long-term studies have shown that habitual coffee drinkers have a lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes compared with non-drinkers. The polyphenols and minerals such as magnesium in coffee may improve the effectiveness of insulin and glucose metabolism in the body. In a meta-analysis of 45,335 people with type 2 diabetes followed for up to 20 years, an association was found with increasing cups of coffee and a lower risk of developing diabetes. Compared with no coffee, the decreased risk ranged from 8% with 1 cup a day to 33% for 6 cups a day. Caffeinated coffee showed a slightly greater benefit than decaffeinated coffee. [7]

Another meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies showed similar associations. When comparing the highest intake of coffee (up to 10 cups a day) with the lowest (<1 cup), there was a 30% decreased risk of type 2 diabetes in those drinking the highest amounts of coffee and caffeine and a 20% decreased risk when drinking decaffeinated coffee. Further analysis showed that the incidence of diabetes decreased by 12% for every 2 extra cups of coffee a day, and 14% for every 200 mg a day increase in caffeine intake (up to 700 mg a day). [8]

Heart health Caffeine is a stimulant affecting the central nervous system that can cause different reactions in people. In sensitive individuals, it can irritate the stomach, increase anxiety or a jittery feeling, and disrupt sleep. Although many people appreciate the temporary energy boost after drinking an extra cup of coffee, high amounts of caffeine can cause unwanted heart palpitations in some. Unfiltered coffee, such as French press and Turkish coffees, contains diterpenes, substances that can raise bad LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. Espresso coffee contains moderate amounts of diterpenes. Filtered coffee (drip-brewed coffee) and instant coffee contain almost no diterpenes as the filtering and processing of these coffee types removes the diterpenes. Despite these factors, evidence suggests that drinking coffee regularly may lower the risk of heart disease and stroke: Among 83,076 women in the Nurses’ Health Study, drinking 4 or more cups of coffee each day was associated with a 20% lower risk of stroke compared with non-drinkers. Decaffeinated coffee also showed an association, with 2 or more cups daily and a 11% lower stroke risk. The authors found no such association with other caffeinated drinks such as tea and soda. These coffee-specific results suggest that components in coffee other than caffeine may be protective. [9]

A large cohort of 37,514 women concluded that moderate coffee drinking of 2-3 cups a day was associated with a 21% reduced risk of heart disease. [10]

In addition, a meta-analysis of 21 prospective studies of men and women looking at coffee consumption and death from chronic diseases found a link between moderate coffee consumption (3 cups per day) and a 21% lower risk of cardiovascular disease deaths compared with non-drinkers. [11]

Another meta-analysis of 36 studies including men and women reviewed coffee consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases (including heart disease, stroke, heart failure, and deaths from these conditions). It found that when compared with the lowest intakes of coffee (average 0 cups), a moderate coffee intake of 3-5 cups a day was linked with a 15% lower risk of cardiovascular disease. Heavier coffee intake of 6 or more cups daily was neither associated with a higher nor a lower risk of cardiovascular disease. [12]

Depression Naturally occurring polyphenols in both caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee can act as antioxidants to reduce damaging oxidative stress and inflammation of cells. It may have neurological benefits in some people and act as an antidepressant. [13] Caffeine may affect mental states such as increasing alertness and attention, reducing anxiety, and improving mood. [14] A moderate caffeine intake of less than 6 cups of coffee per day has been associated with a lower risk of depression and suicide. However in a few cases of sensitive individuals, higher amounts of caffeine may increase anxiety, restlessness, and insomnia. Suddenly stopping caffeine intake can cause headache, fatigue, anxiety, and low mood for a few days and may persist for up to a week. [15] A prospective cohort study following 263,923 participants from the National Institutes of Health and American Association of Retired Persons found that those who drank 4 or more cups of coffee a day were almost 10% less likely to become depressed than those who drank none. [15]

In a meta-analysis of observational studies including 330,677 participants, the authors found a 24% reduced risk of depression when comparing the highest (4.5 cups/day) to lowest (<1 cup) intakes of coffee. They found an 8% decreased risk of depression with each additional cup of coffee consumed. There was also a 28% reduced risk of depression comparing the highest to lowest intakes of caffeine, with the greatest benefit occurring with caffeine intakes between 68 and 509 mg a day (about 6 oz. to 2 cups of coffee). [16]

A review looking at three large prospective cohorts of men and women in the U.S. found a decreasing risk of suicide with increasing coffee consumption. When compared with no-coffee drinkers, the pooled risk of suicide was 45% lower among those who drank 2-3 cups daily and 53% lower among those who drank 4 or more cups daily. There was no association between decaffeinated coffee and suicide risk, suggesting that caffeine was the key factor, rather than plant compounds in coffee. [17]

Neurodegenerative diseases Parkinson’s disease (PD) is mainly caused by low dopamine levels. There is consistent evidence from epidemiologic studies that higher consumption of caffeine is associated with lower risk of developing PD. The caffeine in coffee has been found in animal and cell studies to protect cells in the brain that produce dopamine. A systematic review of 26 studies including cohort and case-control studies found a 25% lower risk of developing PD with higher intakes of caffeinated coffee. It also found a 24% decreased risk with every 300 mg increase in caffeine intake. [18] A Finnish cohort study tracked coffee consumption and PD development in 6,710 men and women over 22 years. In that time, after adjusting for known risks of PD, those who drank at least 10 cups of coffee a day had a significantly lower risk of developing the disease than non-drinkers. [19] A large cohort of men and women were followed for 10 and 16 years, respectively, to study caffeine and coffee intake on PD. The results showed an association in men drinking the most caffeine (6 or more cups of coffee daily) and a 58% lower risk of PD compared with men drinking no coffee. Women showed the lowest risk when drinking moderate intakes of 1-3 cups coffee daily. [20]

(PD) is mainly caused by low dopamine levels. There is consistent evidence from epidemiologic studies that higher consumption of caffeine is associated with lower risk of developing PD. The caffeine in coffee has been found in animal and cell studies to protect cells in the brain that produce dopamine. Alzheimer’s disease: In the CAIDE (Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging and Dementia) study, drinking 3-5 cups of coffee a day at midlife (mean age 50 years) was associated with a significantly decreased risk of Alzheimer’s disease later in life compared with low coffee drinkers after 21 years of follow-up. [2] However, three systematic reviews were inconclusive about coffee’s effect on Alzheimer’s disease due to a limited number of studies and a high variation in study types that produced mixed findings. Overall the results suggested a trend towards a protective effect of caffeine against late-life dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, but no definitive statements could be made. The authors stated the need for larger studies with longer follow-up periods. Randomized controlled trials studying a protective effect of coffee or caffeine on the progression of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia are not yet available. [21-23]

In the CAIDE (Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging and Dementia) study, drinking 3-5 cups of coffee a day at midlife (mean age 50 years) was associated with a significantly decreased risk of Alzheimer’s disease later in life compared with low coffee drinkers after 21 years of follow-up. [2]

Gallstones There are various proposed actions of caffeine or components in coffee that may prevent the formation of gallstones. The most common type of gallstone is made of cholesterol. Coffee may prevent cholesterol from forming into crystals in the gallbladder. It may stimulate contractions in the gallbladder and increase the flow of bile so that cholesterol does not collect. [24] A study of 46,008 men tracked the development of gallstones and their coffee consumption for 10 years. After adjusting for other factors known to cause gallstones, the study concluded that men who consistently drank coffee were significantly less likely to develop gallstones compared to men who did not. [24] A similar large study found the same result in women. [25]

Mortality In a large cohort of more than 200,000 participants followed for up to 30 years, an association was found between drinking moderate amounts of coffee and lower risk of early death. Compared with non-drinkers, those who drank 3-5 cups of coffee daily were 15% less likely to die early from all causes, including cardiovascular disease, suicide, and Parkinson’s disease. Both caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee provided benefits. The authors suggested that bioactive compounds in coffee may be responsible for interfering with disease development by reducing inflammation and insulin resistance. [26]

In a large prospective cohort of more than 500,000 people followed for 10 years, an association was found between drinking higher amounts of coffee and lower rates of death from all causes. Compared with non-drinkers, those drinking 6-7 cups daily had a 16% lower risk of early death. [26] A protective association was also found in those who drank 8 or more cups daily. The protective effect was present regardless of a genetic predisposition to either faster or slower caffeine metabolism. Instant and decaffeinated coffee showed a similar health benefit.

The bottom line: A large body of evidence suggests that consumption of caffeinated coffee does not increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases and cancers. In fact, consumption of 3 to 5 standard cups of coffee daily has been consistently associated with a reduced risk of several chronic diseases. [4] However, some individuals may not tolerate higher amounts of caffeine due to symptoms of jitteriness, anxiety, and insomnia. Specifically, those who have difficulty controlling their blood pressure may want to moderate their coffee intake. Pregnant women are also advised to aim for less than 200 mg of caffeine daily, the amount in 2 cups of coffee, because caffeine passes through the placenta into the fetus and has been associated with pregnancy loss and low birth weight. [3, 27] Because of the potential negative side effects some people experience when drinking caffeinated coffee, it is not necessary to start drinking it if you do not already or to increase the amount you currently drink, as there are many other dietary strategies to improve your health. Decaffeinated coffee is a good option if one is sensitive to caffeine, and according to the research summarized above, it offers similar health benefits as caffeinated coffee. It’s also important to keep in mind how you enjoy your brew. The extra calories, sugar, and saturated fat in a coffee house beverage loaded with whipped cream and flavored syrup might offset any health benefits found in a basic black coffee.

What about iced coffee?

Types

Coffee beans are the seeds of a fruit called a coffee cherry. Coffee cherries grow on coffee trees from a genus of plants called Coffea. There are a wide variety of species of coffee plants, ranging from shrubs to trees.

Type of bean. There are two main types of coffee species, Arabica and Robusta. Arabica originates from Ethiopia and produces a mild, flavorful tasting coffee. It is the most popular type worldwide. However, it is expensive to grow because the Arabica plant is sensitive to the environment, requiring shade, humidity, and steady temperatures between 60-75 degrees Fahrenheit. The Robusta coffee plant is more economical to grow because it is resistant to disease and survives in a wider range of temperatures between 65-97 degrees Fahrenheit. It can also withstand harsh climate changes such as variations in rainfall and strong sunlight.

There are two main types of coffee species, Arabica and Robusta. Arabica originates from Ethiopia and produces a mild, flavorful tasting coffee. It is the most popular type worldwide. However, it is expensive to grow because the Arabica plant is sensitive to the environment, requiring shade, humidity, and steady temperatures between 60-75 degrees Fahrenheit. The Robusta coffee plant is more economical to grow because it is resistant to disease and survives in a wider range of temperatures between 65-97 degrees Fahrenheit. It can also withstand harsh climate changes such as variations in rainfall and strong sunlight. Type of roast. Coffee beans start out green. They are roasted at a high heat to produce a chemical change that releases the rich aroma and flavor that we associate with coffee. They are then cooled and ground for brewing. Roasting levels range from light to medium to dark. The lighter the roast, the lighter the color and roasted flavor and the higher its acidity. Dark roasts produce a black bean with little acidity and a bitter roasted flavor. The popular French roast is medium-dark.

Coffee beans start out green. They are roasted at a high heat to produce a chemical change that releases the rich aroma and flavor that we associate with coffee. They are then cooled and ground for brewing. Roasting levels range from light to medium to dark. The lighter the roast, the lighter the color and roasted flavor and the higher its acidity. Dark roasts produce a black bean with little acidity and a bitter roasted flavor. The popular French roast is medium-dark. Type of grind. A medium grind is the most common and used for automatic drip coffee makers. A fine grind is used for deeper flavors like espresso, which releases the oils, and a coarse grind is used in coffee presses.

A medium grind is the most common and used for automatic drip coffee makers. A fine grind is used for deeper flavors like espresso, which releases the oils, and a coarse grind is used in coffee presses. Decaffeinated coffee. This is an option for those who experience unpleasant side effects from caffeine. The two most common methods used to remove caffeine from coffee is to apply chemical solvents (methylene chloride or ethyl acetate) or carbon dioxide gas. Both are applied to steamed or soaked beans, which are then allowed to dry. The solvents bind to caffeine and both evaporate when the beans are rinsed and/or dried. According to U.S. regulations, at least 97% of the caffeine must be removed to carry the decaffeinated label, so there may be trace residual amounts of caffeine. Both methods may cause some loss of flavor as other naturally occurring chemicals in coffee beans that impart their unique flavor and scent may be destroyed during processing.



Watch out for hidden calories in coffee drinks A plain “black” cup of coffee is a very low calorie drink—8 ounces only contains 2 calories! However, adding sugar, cream, and milk can quickly bump up the calorie counts. A tablespoon of cream contains 52 calories, and a tablespoon of whole milk contains 9 calories. While 9 calories isn’t a lot, milk is often poured into coffee without measuring, so you may be getting several servings of milk or cream in your coffee. A tablespoon of sugar contains 48 calories, so if you take your coffee with cream and sugar, you’re adding over 100 extra calories to your daily cup. However, the real caloric danger occurs in specialty mochas, lattes, or blended ice coffee drinks. These drinks are often super-sized and can contain anywhere from 200-500 calories, as well as an extremely large amount of sugar. With these drinks, it’s best to enjoy them as a treat or dessert, and stick with plain, minimally sweetened coffee on a regular basis

Store

Place beans or ground coffee in an airtight opaque container at room temperature away from sunlight. Inside a cool dark cabinet would be ideal. Exposure to moisture, air, heat, and light can strip coffee of its flavor. Coffee packaging does not preserve the coffee well for extended periods, so transfer larger amounts of coffee to airtight containers.

Coffee can be frozen if stored in a very airtight container. Exposure to even small amounts of air in the freezer can lead to freezer burn.

Make

Follow directions on the coffee package and your coffee machine, but generally the ratio is 1-2 tablespoons of ground coffee per 6 ounces of water.

For optimal coffee flavor, drink soon after brewing. The beverage will lose flavor with time.

Use ground coffee within a few days and whole beans within two weeks.

Did You Know?

It is a myth that darker roasts contain a higher level of caffeine than lighter roasts. Lighter roasts actually have a slightly higher concentration!

Coffee grinds should not be brewed more than once. Brewed grinds taste bitter and may no longer produce a pleasant coffee flavor.

While water is always the best choice for quenching your thirst, coffee can count towards your daily fluid goals. Although caffeine has a mild diuretic effect, it is offset by the total amount of fluid from the coffee.

Related

Caffeine Caffeine is naturally found in the fruit, leaves, and beans of coffee, cacao, and guarana plants. It is also added to beverages and supplements. Learn about sources of caffeine, and a review of the research on this stimulant and health. read more

Last reviewed July 2020 Nutrition & Recipes

This post was written by Lydia Conner, RDN, LD, community outreach dietitian, Parkview Health.

For many people, coffee is more than just coffee. It’s a daily ritual, a hug in a mug, an expression of creativity, an excuse to catch up with a loved one or kindling to jumpstart a busy day. Coffee can play a positive role in our lives and offers some health benefits. But there are also important health considerations, like caffeine level and sweeteners, to keep in mind when choosing how to enjoy your daily cup.



Coffee’s health benefits

Coffee beans are full of antioxidants like hydrocinnamic acids and polyphenols. These substances have a role in protecting our cells from damage from our environment, which may help to reduce our risk of cancer and other chronic diseases. Coffee is thought to be one of the biggest sources of antioxidants in the Western diet; however, these antioxidants are different than the ones we get from food. Therefore, coffee should not replace our intake of antioxidant-rich plant foods such as fruits, vegetables, herbs and spices.



Considerations for coffee consumption

The brew method

The way coffee is brewed makes a difference in the health risks it imposes. For example, unfiltered coffees such as French press, boiled coffee and Turkish coffee, are higher in fat-soluble compounds (cafestol and kahweol) found to raise total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol in humans. On the other hand, filtered, percolated and instant coffee are much lower in these compounds (1).

Not a meal replacement

Coffee does not count as breakfast! When consuming black coffee instead of food, you might feel energetic or alert, but these feelings come from caffeine’s stimulant effect that increases dopamine in our brains. Black coffee contains only about 2.4 calories per cup, which means that it provides essentially no energy for the body’s cells. Food provides us with energy from carbohydrates, fat and protein, along with the vitamins and minerals that help our body to function. So, opting for a healthy breakfast alongside your coffee will better fuel for your body for the day ahead.

Watch for added sugar

Vanilla simple syrup contains about 19 grams of sugar for every 2 tablespoon serving (2 tablespoons = 4 pumps, the standard Grande syrup allotment). For reference, the American Heart Association recommends no more than 25 grams of added sugar for women and no more than 36 grams of added sugar for men per day (2). Additionally, large amounts of sugar/syrup added to craft coffee beverages (think your favorite fall or winter seasonal drink) can spike your blood sugar and leave you feeling a “crash” in energy soon after. Having a snack with protein or heart-healthy fats with your beverage can slow down our digestion of the sugar and lead to better, sustained energy. When you feel tired or low in energy, instead of seeing those feelings as a cry for more caffeine, see it as a call to nourish yourself and instead get some fresh air, drink some water, or get a change in scenery.

Watch your caffeine intake

It’s important to keep an eye on your caffeine consumption. Did you know that the roast level of the coffee affects the caffeine level? It’s true—the darker the roast, the less caffeine there is. So, you might want to opt for a light roast in the morning and a dark roast later in the day.

According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, “For healthy adults, the FDA has cited 400 milligrams per day of caffeine as an amount not generally associated with dangerous, negative effects” (3). For pregnant women, 300 mg or less of caffeine per day is considered safe (3), but women should consult their healthcare providers for advice on daily caffeine consumption. Some people find that caffeine causes adverse effects, such as anxiety, gastrointestinal distress, lack of sleep, and more, so do what is right for your body.

Additionally, caffeine is a diuretic, which means it can lead to more frequent urination. However, it doesn’t seem to increase the risk of dehydration. If you notice an increased need to urinate after drinking coffee, switching to decaffeinated coffee is believed to provide the same nutritional benefits with little to no caffeine. Remember, in general, water is the best option to stay hydrated.

Overall, coffee can be a part of healthy diet and bring a bit of joy to our days, but it affects each of us differently, so we should all choose wisely the type we drink or if we drink it at all.

If you have nutrition-related goals in mind but aren’t sure where to start, ask your primary care provider for a referral to see a dietitian in the outpatient setting. We hold regular Ask the Dietitian sessions through the Center for Healthy Living. Visit the calendar of Classes and Events on parkview.com.

Sources

Oregeonstate.edu

Heart.org

Dietaryguidelines.gov Coffee-related health benefits is an ongoing debate. As registered dietitians, we look at each adult’s individual health goals and for many balancing caffeine intakes with your health goals need finetuning.

Love it or hate it, the truth is evident: We drink a lot of coffee. Europe has the highest coffee consumption in the world, with the average European drinking roughly 13 pounds per year. In the United States, 54 percent of adults drink coffee daily. Coffee has been a staple that dates to the 11th century. First cultivated in Africa and is now available worldwide. In fact, the increasing consumption of coffee in any of its forms (hot, cold or as part of a multi-ingredient beverage) makes a discussion about health benefits even more timely.

There was a time when doctors warned against too much coffee consumption to prevent caffeine addictive, stomach ulcers and cancer. More extensive medical research shows that coffee alone is not the cause but contributed to health risks when coffee is the primary drink of choice in a poor diet or if smoking tobacco and drinking alcohol if a factor.

The coffee bean is the seed of the fruit from the coffee tree. The pit of this fruit resembles a bean. The nutritional benefits of this plant are phytochemicals (beneficial compounds), such as flavonoids which may prevent inflammation, tumor growth, and aid the body’s immune function. New research reports coffee may improve memory and cognitive function, as well as reduce the risk of diabetes and slow the progression of liver disease. The disease-fighting antioxidants in coffee may also improve mood and headaches. Smaller studies are evaluating if the risk of certain cancers reduces by drinking coffee or if Parkinson’s disease symptoms improve with coffee.

In many cases, it’s unclear how much coffee at what concentration needs to be ingested to benefit our health.

Too Much Coffee

While coffee consumption does present some health benefits, there are also precautions from drinking a beverage with too much caffeine. Most healthy adults can safely consume up to 400mg of caffeine a day – roughly four cups of coffee. Overconsumption of caffeine can result in migraine headaches, insomnia, increased heart rate, muscle tremors, restlessness, frequent urination, irritability, or nervousness. If used to combat sleep deprivation, caffeine can significantly alter your natural sleep cycle.

Drinking coffee and other caffeinated drinks while pregnant is now advised. Coffee is both a stimulant and diuretic. The caffeine in coffee increases both blood pressure and heart rate which is not beneficial to the mother or baby during pregnancy. What you eat and drink during pregnancy and while breastfeeding impacts your growing baby. Caffeine can also increase urination which can lead to dehydration. Expectant mothers need to be well hydrated. Developing babies also lack a matured metabolism and may not be able to adequately metabolize the caffeine that comes with your consumption of coffee.

Coffee in Other Forms

Coffee may have inherent benefits, but how you prepare your beverage is crucial. Coffee drinks with large amounts of sugar, syrups or cream contain more calories, added sugar, and fat. This combination could be unhealthy and reverse potential health benefits. For example, one 8-ounce black coffee has only one calorie and no fat or sugar. An 8-ounce mocha (coffee and chocolate) has approximately 200 calories, 18 grams of sugar and 9 grams of fat. A coffee Frappuccino (depending on the size) has at least 300 calories, 50 grams of sugar and 14 grams of fat. These higher-calorie coffees are more like desserts.

There is no one size fits all solution for coffee drinkers. Some adults find having a final cup of coffee after lunch disrupts nighttime sleep. Individual tolerance for caffeine differs. Talk to your doctor and a nutritionist to understand how coffee may help or hinder your health goals.

To learn more about how your coffee or caffeine intake may impact your health, talk to our St Vincent’s clinical nutritionists. For a consultation, call 904-602-1264. Coffee may put you in a better mood and give you more energy, thanks to caffeine.

The polyphenols in coffee may be good for your heart, thyroid and brain.

You can enjoy coffee black, whipped, in a latte or even in baked desserts.

The actor Hugh Jackman once said, "The smell of fresh-made coffee is one of the world's greatest inventions." The facts are that almost 75% of U.S. adults drink coffee every single day. With its slightly bitter taste and warm-colored hue, a cup of joe is built into many people's morning routines, sipping it before they can even think about doing anything else. And for others, there is nothing quite like a cold brew or a latte in the middle of the day to help get over that 3 p.m. slump. Is it more than just a convenient pick-me-up? Is coffee good for you? "Research shows that moderate consumption of coffee (typically 3 to 4 cups a day) in healthy individuals poses no significant health risk and may actually provide some benefit," said Elizabeth Shaw, M.S., RDN, CPT, a global nutrition expert, author and owner of ShawSimpleSwaps.com.

Coffee is so much more than a must-have morning drink. It is the biggest source of antioxidants in the American diet. If you are one of the many people who drink coffee every day and are wondering what this habit might be doing to your body, keep reading to learn more.

Why We Love Coffee

Depending on how it is served, coffee can have some pretty amazing health effects. Here are some outcomes associated with coffee consumption that are pretty impressive.

It May Give You More Energy

Coffee beans contain caffeine, a natural stimulant that can help you feel more energized. Specifically, this compound stimulates the central nervous system, helping people get a little more pep in their step.

It Might Help with More Regular BMs

Drinking a cup of coffee (or any caffeine-containing drink) can give you a boost of energy. But it may also leave you with a feeling of needing to go No. 2—and rather quickly, too.

Coffee consumption has been shown to stimulate colonic motility, or the movement that occurs in your gastrointestinal tract. Coffee drinking promotes the desire to have a bowel movement among around one-third of the population, thanks to this stimulation of colonic motility.

Research shows that moderate consumption of coffee in healthy individuals poses no significant health risk and may actually provide some benefit. —Elizabeth Shaw, M.S., RDN, CPT

It Might Boost Your Mood

Many coffee lovers will agree that a good cup of coffee is the ticket to happiness. And there is actual data to support that idea. Caffeine increases dopamine production and has been shown in research to lead to a positive mood. If that isn't enough to put a smile on your face, we don't know what is!

It May Reduce Your Risk of Alzheimer's Disease

Coffee doesn't just deliver a jolt of caffeine. Coffee also contains a number of bioactive polyphenol compounds that may support certain aspects of our health, including our brain health. Coffee consumption may be correlated with a decreased risk of developing some neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and dementia.

It May Lower Cardiovascular Disease Risk

Would you believe that the simple act of drinking coffee may support your heart health? Research has found that habitual consumption of moderate amounts of coffee per day (about 2-4 cups) is associated with a reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease. However, be cautious, as excessive coffee drinking can increase your risk. Stick to a few cups a day.

It May Give You Better Thyroid Function

Research has found a potential association between moderate caffeine intake and improved thyroid function among people with metabolic disorders. Specifically, caffeine intake of between 9.97 and 264.97 milligrams per day was positively linked to a healthy thyroid-stimulating hormone level.

Nutrition Information

Plain black coffee does not offer much in nutritional value for common nutrients, rather, it is the polyphenols in coffee that offer a health benefit. Here is the nutrition information for one, 8 ounce cup of coffee (248g).



Calories: 5

5 Carbohydrates: 0.4 g

0.4 g Dietary fiber: 0 g

0 g Total sugar: 0 g

0 g Added sugar: 0 g

0 g Protein: 0.7 g

0.7 g Total fat: 0 g

0 g Saturated fat: 0 g

0 g Cholesterol: 0 g

0 g Sodium: 2.5 g

2.5 g Caffeine: 92 mg

92 mg Potassium: 124 mg

124 mg Magnesium: 10 mg



Is Coffee Safe For Everyone?

As with many things, there can be too much of a good thing. Drinking too much caffeinated coffee can cause anxiety, sleep disorders, poor appetite and dependency. And while coffee provides numerous health benefits, certain people should limit or avoid it. This includes people with sensitive stomachs or those prone to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), as caffeine can stimulate acid production. Those who are pregnant, as well as people with sleep disorders, anxiety or an iron deficiency or iron-deficiency anemia may also want to limit their intake, as coffee can inhibit iron absorption. And finally, if you take medication to treat thyroid disorders, like levothyroxine, it's important to limit or avoid coffee, as it can interact with this medication,



3 Ways to Enjoy Coffee

You may be a black coffee drinker, but there are so many way to enjoy this classic and popular beverage.

Coffee drink: Whether you mix it with a bit of cream, milk or sugar, adding flavor to your coffee can take away the bitterness and give you a satisfying drink, like our Lavender Latte or High Protein Whipped Iced Coffee.

In baked goods: If you are making something chocolate-y, there might be coffee in the recipe. You won't get a mocha flavor, the coffee brings out the flavor of the chocolate—basically, it makes the chocolate taste more like chocolate. We used coffee in our One-Bowl Chocolate Cake and One-Bowl Vegan Chocolate Cake.

Alcoholic drinks: Martini anyone? We've paired our favorite breakfast beverage for an evening sip, like this Frozen Espresso Martini.

Our Expert Take

Drinking coffee every day appears to be safe for generally healthy people, and this habit may actually offer some health benefits too. While there are some potential side effects of consuming coffee, and certain people should avoid it, generally, enjoying coffee every day appears to be A-OK. Of course, it's always wise to confirm whether coffee is right for you with your own health care provider before you sip away.